Verbena, aloe vera, melisse, lemon-balm, and finally the usual apple; the palate as always is shady and cool, though more overtly mineral than usual, but the finish crescendos into a salty tide that clings and doesn’t quit. I love when … writes about finishes that “last a minute.” A minute??? Dude, this little insignificant … has a finish you taste for ten minutes, and the only way to obliterate it is with the next wine.

and no one can argue that he is the appellation’s greatest guardian of traditional winemaking. How does one describe an …Perhaps the best description is that it represents a liquefied charcoal grilled steak heavily crusted on the outside, blood red on the inside, sprinkled with Provencal herbs, and doused in black pepper.



Acidity
Wines with high acidity taste tart and zesty. Red wines have more tart fruit characteristics (versus “sweet fruit”). White wines are often described with characteristics similar to lemon or lime juice.
Angular
An angular wine is like putting a triangle in your mouth – it hits you in specific places with high impact and not elsewhere. It’s like getting punched in the arm in the same place over and over again. An angular wine also has high acidity.
Austere
This is a very unfriendly wine. It hits your mouth and then turns it inside out. It usually means the wine has very high acidity and very little fruit flavors. An austere wine is not fruit-forward nor opulent.
Barnyard
This means the wine smells like poo. It’s never used anymore describing a wine, unless the wine writer is attempting to dig that wine an early grave.
Big
Big describes a wine with massive flavor in your mouth that takes up all sections of your mouth and tongue. A big wine is not necessarily a fruit-forward wine, it can also mean that it has big tannins.
Bright
Bright wines are higher in acidity and make your mouth water. GO TO ACIDITY
Buttery
A wine with buttery characteristics has been aged in oak and generally is rich and flat (less Acidity). A buttery wine often has a cream-like texture that hits the middle of your tongue almost like oil (or butter) and has a smooth finish.
Cassis
The least fruit-like of all dark fruits. When writers mention cassis, they are often thinking of the seedy and gritty character of actual black currants. Homework assignment: try a black currant and report back.
Charcoal
A wine that is described as tasting like charcoal tastes gritty, it’s usually dry (with higher tannins) and has this rustic flavor. Charcoal is often associated with a similar characteristic: pencil lead (but less refined).
Chewy tannins
When you take a sip of wine with chewy tannins, it dries out the interior of your mouth so that you “chew” or clean the tannins out of the insides of your mouth.
Cigar box
Cigar box flavors are hinting toward sweetness and cedar-wood with an abundance of smoke. This is a super positive and desirable characteristic that wine writers love to use when they find a wine they wish they could just slowly sip on a leather chair.
Complex
A complex wine simply means that when you taste it, the flavor changes from the moment you taste it to the moment you swallow. As much as I love complex wines, using the word “complex” to describe a wine is a cop-out unless you go on to describe how it’s complex.
Creamy
Creamy is a popular description for white wines and sparkling wines fermented or aged in oak. In Champagne, creamy is a favored characteristic that is associated with the famous bottles of bubbly…such as Krug. A creamy wine could be in part because of something called Malo-Lactic conversion. Look for creamy in chardonnay if you like buttery. Look for creamy in cabernet sauvignon if you like smooooth.
Crisp
The word Crisp with wine is more often used to describe a white wine. A crisp wine is most likely simple but goes really well with a porch swing on a hot day.
Dense
This wine writer pairs down his lengthy description of flavors and characteristics of a wine into one word, he uses dense. Dense is favored for use in bold red wines such as cabernet sauvignon, Côtes du Rhône and Brunello di Montalcino but usually isn’t a positive characteristic in other wines because it implies that wine is handicapped.
Earthy
A classic go-to move for a wine writer trying to describe that awkward green and unpleasant finish on a wine. They don’t want to hate on the wine, they just want you to know that if you don’t like the wine it means you don’t like earthy and you’re a bad person.
Elegant
This wine writer says elegant he means that the wine is NOT big, NOT fruity, NOT opulent and NOT bold. Off-vintages are often referred to as elegant vintages as they have higher acid and tend to have more ‘green’ characteristics. Elegant wines may taste like crap when they first release but they also tend to age better. Elegant is that retired ballerina who puts the fat-n-sassy retired cheerleaders to shame.
Fat
Wide, Big, Massive, Opulent: These are all similar synonyms of fat. Turns out fat is the least desirable of all of them because it’s flabby. A fat wine comes in and takes up all the room in your mouth and hangs in awkward places.
Flabby
Flabby means the wine has no acidity. It’s a negative connotation so don’t say it to a wine maker! They will spear you with their forklift.
Flamboyant
A flamboyant wine is trying to get your attention with an abundance of fruit. The writer picks up on this and calls it out. No joke.
Fleshy
Imagine the iron-laden sensation of having a piece of raw steak in your mouth that is fleshy.
Foof friendly
This wine falls on its face unless you have it with food. It’s lacking something that eating something will fulfill. Keep in mind, wines that stand on their own are better drunk without food. doh!
Grip
With each subsequent sip, your mouth dries up similar to how my mouth did in the Minerality Tastes Like Rocks? video. Wine with grip is hard to drink, better to sip.
Hint of
Hint of = This-Wine-Definitely-Has-This-Character-Especially-on-the-Finish. Expect things like oak, herbs, fruits, soil or gym socks in the flavor when there is a hint of it in the description.
Intellectually satisfying
This is a rare but special occurring term used by one of the most famous wine critics, Robert Parker. Robert Parker is sure that if you are not satisfied by this wine on a hedonistic and intellectual level then you don’t deserve to drink it. This is probably true, because these words are reserved for the wines we can’t afford anyway…sadface.
Jammy
Sommeliers and wine experts cringe when they hear this term while the rest of us delight. Jam is delicious and it is part of the PB&J experience. In wine, jammy indicates a wine with a cooked berry sweetness that is syrupy and often is used to describe American wines like zinfandel, grenache, cabernet franc and Australian shiraz…don’t be a hater.
Juicy
Juicy like the wine was grape juice just a moment ago.
Laser-like
Another one of Robert Parker’s idioms that we can’t help mentioning. pew! pew! GO TO DENSE
Lees
Lees are an actual winemaking term describing the dead bits of yeast particles that generally sink to the bottom of a wine. Lees are stirred up once a day to make a wine have a thicker, more oily, creamy texture.
Minerally
Imagine that smell of fresh wet concrete; now imagine that flavor in your mouth. If you don’t have time to lick concrete, don’t worry we did.
Oaked
Oh oak! The ultimate non-grape influence to the flavors in wine. In white wine it adds butter, vanilla and sometimes coconut. In red wine it adds flavors often referred to as baking spices, vanilla and sometimes dill. There are a milieu of different countries that make oak wine barrels and wine geeks freak out over who makes the best (American v. France).
Opulent
This word is a baseline word to a style of wine that is rich, smooth and bold. If you are a rich, smooth, bold wine guy, “Opulent” is your word.
Refined
Refined is a subset of elegant wines. This term is often used while describing tannins in a wine. These wines have the “less is more” ideology about them. Elegant
Silky
Silky is the red-wine equivalent word to creamy with white wines.
Steely
A steely wine has higher acid and more sharp edges. It is the man-ballerina of wine.
Structured
A structured wine has high tannin and acid and is hard to drink. People say “stuctured” because they think that if you give the wine a few years, it’ll soften up and be yummy. GO TO AUSTERE
Tight
This wine is not ready to drink. When I taste a tight wine it usually has very high tannins, hard-to-identify fruit characteristics and is hard-to-drink. This wine could benefit from being decanted (see How to Decant Wine).
Toasty
Toasty is most commonly a reference to a wine that’s oak-aged in Medium Plus Toasted Oak. It doesn’t actually taste like toast (sorry to disappoint) it’s more like slightly burnt caramel on the finish.
Unctuous
This wine is unctuous it is oily.
Unoaked
A wine that is unoaked doesn’t have vanilla, cream, butter or baking spices in it. An unoaked white wine is more zesty with lemony flavors (see Minerally), while an unoaked red wine tends to be more tart.
Velvety
Lush, smooth and silky are all synonyms of a velvety wine. To imagine velvety, visualize watching perfectly smooth chocolate pouring into a mold on a Dove chocolate commercial.

Acidity
All wines are acidic, that is with a lower pH than that of water. However some wines are more acidic. The more acidic a wine is, the more it tends to give a "puckering" effect much like a lemon drop. Acidity is an important aspect for food and wine pairing.

Aftertaste
The sensation that is left after swallowing wine. Also known as the Finish - this is an important characteristic that is associated with the quality of the wine. High quality wines tend to have a pleasant, lingering finish that matches or balances the initial

Appearance
The visuals of a wine in terms of the clarity (not just "white" or "red"). Example - Clear or Cloudy. 

Aroma
Because the sense of taste is limited, Aromas in wine are often heavily analyzed.
Aromas are the "smells". Heavily influence the perceived quality of a wine. There are "Aroma Wheels" that can help discern and enjoy every flavor.
In contrast with Bouquet, Aromas are more associated with the smells that originate from the grape varietal, rather than winemaking technique.

Astringent
Descriptor for a wine that has compounds that bind with saliva, causing it to lose lubrication. Mostly found in red wines with high Tannin.

Attack
The initial sensations and flavors of wine after tasting.

Awkward
Without Balance

Balance

Generally refers to if a wines Acidity, Alcohol, Residual Sugar, Aromas, Flavors, and all other components work together for a pleasant experience. A "Balanced" wine have no characteristics that stick out in awkward or unpleasant manner.

Barnyard
Smelling like a barnyard - including the animals and their waste... not generally a positive descriptor for a wine.

Bitter
Taste sensation often caused by Tannin.

Body
The way wine feels in your mouth, typically "light", "medium", "heavy". Largely affected by the alcohol concentration.

Bouquet
In practice, another way of saying aroma. However - professionals are typically referring to smells that occur in winemaking (such as oak). Some use the term when referring to high quality wines with very pleasant Aromas.

Brilliant
Descriptor for appearance in wine - typically meaning sparkling, bright, or clear.

Buttery
Generally a taste that comes with Chardonnay's that have been Oaked - literally with a subtle "butter" Flavor.

Burnt
Having smokey characteristics - but often unpleasantly powering

Chewy
High in Tannin and Body

Clean
No blemish or faults in Flavor - but not typically bland. "Clean" wine has very little Aromas and Flavor to it.

Closed
Descriptor for a wine without much Expression.

Complex
A wine that has flavors that change as it is tasted

Corked
Descriptor for wine affected by Cork Taint

 Cork Taint
Typically referring to wines affected by TCA, a compound that adds an unpleasant aroma to the wine. This aroma is often described as wet dog or cardboard.
TCA affects wines regardless of their quality - and is a byproduct of fungi that can grow on natural cork. 7% of wines were historically affected, significantly reduced by improvements in technology has brought this down to 2-3%.

Demi - sec
French for "half-dry", sweeter than dry wines (Sec) or Brut wines.

Dry
Not sweet

Earthy
Descriptor that generalizes many aromas such as: Dusty, Gravel, Stone, Wood, and similar specific descriptors - often also including some herbs (such as cut grass)

Elegant
Catch all for a wine that is Balanced and of good quality.

Expression
How noticeable a wines overall characteristics are. Low expression wines are often considered lower quality or to made to be consumed with food

Finish
Lingering taste left by the wine - the last impression made after swallowing.
See Aftertaste

Flavors
Combination of the perceptions on the tongue of acidity, sweet, bitter, and often using other foods to describe.

Foxy
Having notes of animal fur on the nose.

Fruity (or Fruit-Forward)
Fruit notes (for example: apple, cherry, strawberry, plum) dominating the Aromas.

Full - Bodied
Heavy in alcohol and mouthfeel.

Herbaceous
Notes of herbs and/or vegetables (for example: straw, bell pepper, black olive) dominating the Aromas.
Hot
Having a burn from too much alcohol.

 

Length
Short, medium, or long - describing the amount of time the Finish or Aftertaste lasts.

Mature
Wines that have been Aged properly and are at their "peak" for consumption (or for bottling)

Mouth-Feel
The way a wine feels in a mouth - in terms of texture. This can include descriptors like "hot", or "silky".


Oak
Wood that is used in many barrels - generally a more expensive and often sought after. 
May impart and oak or vanilla flavor on the wine.

Open
Opposite of Closed. Wines described as "open" give off stronger aromas. 

Rough
Very Tannic (having strong Tannin), usually a young wine, or often a catch-all for a wine that is strong in an area that is not particularly pleasant.

Sec
French for "Dry", not sweet

Spicy
Descriptor that a wine has the Aromas or Flavors of spices such as: cinnamon, peppercorn, clover, or nutmeg. These are often infused by the Oak Barrels.

Structure
Similar to Balance, but refers to how a wine's Acid, Alcohol, Residual Sugar and non-Flavor/non-Aroma components come together.

Sweet
Wines with more Residual Sugar and taste, well, sweet.

Tannin
A Phenolic Compound (Polyphenols to be precise) that contributes to high Astringency and Bitter flavors. Tannins can come from the grape skins, stems, and even the Oak from Barrels.
Strong Tannin's can be softened by letting a glass Breath for 5 to 20 minutes or, with some high quality wines, by Aging in a cellar.

Texture
The way a wine feels in a mouth - in terms of texture. This can include descriptors like "hot", or "silky". See Mouth-Feel.

Typicity
The degree to which a wine is reflects wines of that region. For example, a wine has high Typicity from California has strong fruit character.

Vegetal
Descriptor for wines that have Aromas deriving from vegitables. For example, green beans or bell pepper.

Young
Descriptor for a wine that has not been aged long. These wines can be pleasant, but do not typically have the effects of Aging.

Pol Clement France
Apple, pear and a yeasty undertone all the way to the bold and refreshing lemon-crisp finish.

Moet & Chandon 
Imperial Brut, Flagship Champagne. Supple and Crisp with notes of Plum, Pineapple, and Peach.

Tattinger Brut 
Well-structured, full-bodied, juicy pear and golden grape narrows to citrus and grapefruit flavors.

Jacquart Rose
Red berry-fruit aromas give way to notes of plum. Fresh and full, flower finishing with surprising notes of peach and apricot.

Dom Perignon 
The premier name in high-end exquisite Champagne. Complex, edgy, and silky.

Croft 
Aromas of spices, walnut, butterscotch and oak, rich, jammy fruit background, round palate of ripe fig.

Taylor Fladgate 
Rich nose of ripe berry, chocolate, butterscotch and oak, palate of ripe fig, jammy flavors which linger luciously.
